# List, set, and , change standard ugo/rwx permissions

## List file permissions 
`ls -al` - this is the easiest way to view permissions from the terminal of the files in your current working directory ( `a` can be left out if hidden files are not desired )

```
[centos@greplog dir]$ ls -al
total 4
drwxrwxr-x.  5 centos centos   93 Aug 17 17:43 .
drwx------. 10 centos centos 4096 Aug 17 17:42 ..
drwxrwxr-x.  2 centos centos    6 Aug 17 17:43 dir1
drwxrwxr-x.  2 centos centos    6 Aug 17 17:43 dir2
drwxrwxr-x.  2 centos centos    6 Aug 17 17:43 dir3
-rw-rw-r--.  1 centos centos    0 Aug 17 17:43 file1.txt
-rw-rw-r--.  1 centos centos    0 Aug 17 17:43 file2.txt
-rw-rw-r--.  1 centos centos    0 Aug 17 17:43 file3.txt
[centos@greplog dir]$
```

### rwx
- r = read
- w = write
- x = execute
- X = execute for folders only 

### Breakdown of permissions  `-rwxrwxrwx.`

user read (r) - `r`wxrwxrwx.
user write (w) - r`w`xrwxrwx.
user execute (x) - rw`x`rwxrwx.
    group read (r) - rwx`r`wxrwx.
    group write (w) - rwxr`w`xrwx.
    group execute (x) -rwxrw`x`rwx.
    	other read (r) -rwxrwx`r`wx.
    	other write (w) -rwxrwxr`w`x.
    	other execute(x) -rwxrwxrw`x`.

Note: x for directories is required for folder navigation. 

## Change/Set file permissions 

You set file permissions with `chomd` for a single file/directory. To set for every subfile and subdirectory of parent directory use `chmod -r`
 
- a = all - user/group/other
- u = user 
- g = group
- o = other - everyone else on the system

`chmod o-r file1.txt` - to remove read permissions from other

`chmod a+r file1.txt` - to add read permissions from all

`chmod -r g+x dir1` - to add group execute to directory and all sub-directory and files.

`chmod +x script.sh` 
or 
`chmod u+x script.sh` - to make file executable for user 


`chmod ug+rwx file2.txt` - to add read, write, execute to user and group of file.

### Special file permissions

#### SUID
run program as owner - `chmod 4755 /usr/bin/programName`

#### SGID
ensure each file/directory created is owned by the group of parent directory
`chmod 2755 /data/project` 

#### Sticky bit
Only use on dir - users cannot delete or rename files  - only root and owner can 

`chmod 1755 /data/project2`
